For that reason another line of play has come to the fore in which White exchanges his inactive B for Black's troublesome B. 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 White has now the choice of two lines of development. He can either prepare for c3 to support his P. or he can develop his King's side, holding the P at e5 only I: 7. Nb5 Nb6 8. c3 a6 9. Na3 c5 10. f4 Nf6 11. Nc2 O-O-O 12. Nf3 Bd7 13. Bd3 f5 The sacrifice Bxa6+ as mentioned above, was threatened. 14. O-O Na4 15. Rb1 b5  If White does not wish to lose so many moves with his N he can effect the intended protection of his P as follows: 7. Qd2 a6 not c4 at once, because of Nb5. 8. Nd1 c5 9. c3 II: 7. f4 O-O 8. Nf3 c5 9. Bd3 f5 10. O-O Nc6 and so on. In both cases White has an easy development, whilst Black has no convenient square for his Queen's Bishop. To avoid this drawback Rubinstein has evolved the following variation, in which provision is made from the first for the freedom of action of the Queen's Bishop: 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 dxe4 to open the diagonal for the Bishop at b2 e.g.: 5. Nxe4 Nd7 6. Nf3 Be7 followed by b3 and Bb2. We will now leave the French defence and turn our attention to the Caro-Kann, of which the initial position was shown in Diagram 28. Here also we find two essentially different systems of development, according to whether White plays e5 or gives Black the option of exchanging pawns by 3. Nc3 In the first case a very noticeable difference from the French defence is, that Black can bring out his Queen's Bishop. Here the process of development may be: 3. e5 Bf5 4. Bd3 Bxd3 Not BN3 because White could play e6! and paralyse the whole of Black's game by preventing his playing the King's Pawn. 5. Qxd3 e6 6. Ne2 or h3 Through this the move f4 which fits into this pawn formation, is kept in reserve. While White's development is easy and natural, Black has difficulty in finding good places for his King's side pieces. The game can proceed generally speaking on the lines of the French defence. Only Black can hardly attack White's centre with f6 since the Pawn at e6 would be weak in the absence of the Queen's Bishop. On the other hand, Black would be a move behind with an attack on the Queen's side, since to reach c5 his pawn would have made two moves instead of one as in the French defence. A certain compensation lies in the fact that White's attacking King's Bishop has been exchanged. In practical play it has nevertheless been shown that White's attack is more likely to succeed, and for this reason a variation introduced by Niemzowitsch has been tried several times; it aims at the exchange of Queens in order to weaken and retard White's threatened attack, and to gain time for Queen's side operations. 6. ...      Qb6 7. O-O  Qa6 or Qb5 But after 8. Nf4 Qxd3 9. Nxd3 White is so much ahead with his development that Black's chance of equalising the game would seem questionable. If White plays Nh3 on his sixth move, he foils at once Black's attempt of forcing an exchange of Queens, as he could play 8. Qg3. On the whole we can conclude that in the Caro-Kann defence White obtains a good game by 3. e5 . A line of play which used to be in vogue, namely, 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nf6 5. Nxf6+ exf6 or gxf6 gives Black an even chance, for although he loses his centre pawn he obtains a good development, and later in the game he has opportunities of exercising pressure on White's P through his open d file. Except the French defence and the Caro-Kann, there is no game in which an irregular reply to White's 1. e4 necessitates any special considerations either in development of pieces or pawn formation. In all such cases it is sufficient to maintain the pawn centre and to occupy such squares with the pieces, whence they cannot be driven away with the loss of a move. Just one example: If Black plays 1. ... c4 (Sicilian defence), White will not play his King's Bishop to c4 because Black can reply e6 and gain a move by d5. B. Let us now consider the openings in which the first move is 1. d4 on either side. Here the centre cannot be cleared as early as in the openings beginning with 1. e4 e5.  The advance of a second centre pawn, which there led to a clearance, is not feasible in this case. White does not command his e4, and for some time to come he will be unable to advance the K pawn beyond e3. In consequence the e file does not seem a likely opening for the Rooks, and another file must be found for them. The conclusions arrived at for Black in the French defence hold good for both sides in the opening now under consideration, and accordingly the c file is that most advantageous for the Rooks. The advance of the c P strikes at the opposing centre, and, that being of paramount importance, the Queen's Knight must not be developed at c3 before the cP has been pushed on.  Another development might be conceivable for the Rooks; viz. on the f file, and also the g or h file; here, as we shall see, an occasion may arise for storming the opposing King's side by a pawn attack. But in this case, too, although it seems unnecessary to play the cP it is advisable to develop the Knight via d2 as there is a constant threat of the c file being forced open subsequently by the opposing forces. 